Install the Datadog Agent with Embedded OpenTelemetry Collector (#24539)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/opentelemetry/agent/install_agent_with_collector.md

agents:
  image:
    repository: datadog/agent-dev
    tag: nightly-ot-beta-main-jmx
    doNotCheckTag: true

datadog:
  apiKeyExistingSecret: datadog-secret
  appKeyExistingSecret: datadog-secret

  otelCollector:
    enabled: true
    ports:
      - containerPort: "4317"
        hostPort: "4317"
        name: otel-grpc
      - containerPort: "4318"
        hostPort: "4318"
        name: otel-http

  podLabelsAsTags:
    app: kube_app
    release: helm_release
   {{< /code-block >}}

{{% /collapse-content %}}
   
### Configure the OpenTelemetry Collector

The DataDog Helm chart provides a sample OpenTelemetry Collector configuration that's a great starting point for most projects. This section walks you through the predefined pipelines and included OpenTelemetry components.

This is the full OpenTelemetry Collector configuration in `otel-config.yaml`:

{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="otel-config.yaml" disable_copy="false" collapsible="true" >}}
receivers:
  prometheus:
    config:
      scrape_configs:
        - job_name: "otelcol"
          scrape_interval: 10s
          static_configs:
            - targets: ["0.0.0.0:8888"]
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:

>          endpoint: 0.0.0.0:{{ include "get-port-number-from-name" (dict "ports" .Values.datadog.otelCollector.ports "portName" "otel-grpc") }}

Reviewer: > In Configure the OpenTelemetry Collector, this line is included in `otel-config.yaml`: `endpoint: 0.0.0.0:{{ include "get-port-number-from-name" (dict "ports" .Values.datadog.otelCollector.ports "portName" "otel-grpc") }}`. Are we expecting that this dynamically populates? It doesn't seem to work.

These will be dynamically replaced by Helm when running `helm install`/`helm upgrade`. 
Helm chart is the only supported way to install the agent with otel collector at the moment, so we expect customers to be familiar with Helm. 

@brett0000FF if you think it still might be confusing, lets simplify it:

```suggestion
         endpoint: 0.0.0.0: 4317
```

Author: Ah, I think this is fine to leave then. We use a very similar syntax to create dynamic content in the docs, so that tripped me up. Thanks!

      http:

>          endpoint: 0.0.0.0:{{ include "get-port-number-from-name" (dict "ports" .Values.datadog.otelCollector.ports "portName" "otel-http") }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4318
```

{{< img src="/opentelemetry/embedded_collector/infrastructure.png" alt="View runtime and infrastructure metrics from the Host List." style="width:100%;" >}}

### Logs

View logs to monitor and troubleshoot application and system operations.

{{< img src="/opentelemetry/embedded_collector/logs.png" alt="View logs from the Logs Explorer." style="width:100%;" >}}

### Traces

View traces and spans to observe the status and performance of requests processed by your application, with infrastructure metrics correlated in the same trace. 

{{< img src="/opentelemetry/embedded_collector/traces.png" alt="View traces from the Trace Explorer." style="width:100%;" >}}

### Runtime metrics

Monitor your runtime (JVM) metrics for your applications.

{{< img src="/opentelemetry/embedded_collector/metrics.png" alt="View JVM metrics from the JVM Metrics dashboard" style="width:100%;" >}}

### Collector health metrics

View metrics from the embedded Collector to monitor the Collector health.

{{< img src="/opentelemetry/embedded_collector/dashboard.png" alt="View Collector health metrics from the OTel dashboard." style="width:100%;" >}}

> ## Included components

Reviewer 2: Recently added 3 more components that are provided by Datadog. We should add that section at the bottom, see the word doc for reference: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CSdVx4yVGspc8uJJqE9ZhRm7UIjHSQvOpeZFEQRBkOo/edit#bookmark=id.2mfiqne2901c

Author: @LutaoX - Which three components were added? The list in the document you linked appears to match what I have here. Thanks!

Reviewer: Current list is up-to-date.

1. Configure the Datadog API and Application key secrets:
   {{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-values.yaml" collapsible="true" >}}
datadog:
  apiKeyExistingSecret: datadog-secret
  appKeyExistingSecret: datadog-secret
   {{< /code-block >}}
1. Switch the Datadog Agent Docker repository to use development builds:
   {{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-values.yaml" collapsible="true" >}}
agents:
  image:
    repository: datadog/agent-dev
    tag: nightly-ot-beta-main-jmx
    doNotCheckTag: true
...
   {{< /code-block >}}
   <div class="alert alert-info">This guide uses a Java application example. The <code>-jmx</code> suffix in the image tag enables JMX utilities. For non-Java applications, use <code>nightly-ot-beta-main</code> instead.<br> For more details, see <a href="/containers/guide/autodiscovery-with-jmx/?tab=helm">Autodiscovery and JMX integration guide</a>.</div>
1. Enable the OpenTelemetry Collector and configure the essential ports:
   {{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-values.yaml" collapsible="true" >}}
datadog:
  ...
  otelCollector:
    enabled: true
    ports:
      - containerPort: "4317" # default port for OpenTelemetry gRPC receiver.

>         hostPort: "4317"

Reviewer: Great suggestion! Added 👍

- Support for traces, metrics, and logs
- A curated set of components for optimal performance with Datadog

{{< img src="/opentelemetry/embedded_collector/architecture.png" alt="Architecture overview for Collector embedded in the Datadog Agent." style="width:100%;" >}}

Follow this guide to install the Datadog Agent with the OpenTelemetry Collector using Helm.

<div class="alert alert-info">If your application is already instrumented with the OTel SDK or if you want to build a Datadog Agent image with additional OpenTelemetry components, read <a href="/opentelemetry/agent/agent_with_custom_components">Use Custom OpenTelemetry Components with Datadog Agent</a>.<br>For a list of components included by default, see <a href="#included-components">Included components</a>.</div>

## Requirements

To complete this guide, you need the following:

**Datadog account**:
1. [Create a Datadog account][1] if you don't have one.
1. Find or create your [Datadog API key][2].
1. Find or create your [Datadog application key][3].

**Software**:
Install and set up the following on your machine:

- A Kubernetes cluster (v1.29+)
- Helm (v3+)
- [Docker][50]
- [kubectl][5]

> - Ensure all OTel components are compatible with the [embedded OpenTelemetry Collector version][51]

Author: The idea here is that the OTel components are compatible with the otelcol_version, for example 0.104.0 right now. Does that make sense? I suppose it might make more sense in the BYOC doc actually.

> - Ensure all OTel components are compatible with the [embedded OpenTelemetry Collector version][51]

Reviewer 3: Yes. remove from here

    ports:
      - containerPort: "4317"
        hostPort: "4317"
        name: otel-grpc
      - containerPort: "4318"
        hostPort: "4318"
        name: otel-http
  apm:
    portEnabled: true
    peer_tags_aggregation: true
    compute_stats_by_span_kind: true
    peer_service_aggregation: true
  orchestratorExplorer:
    enabled: true
  processAgent:
    enabled: true
    processCollection: true

  podLabelsAsTags:
    app: kube_app
    release: helm_release
   {{< /code-block >}}

{{% /collapse-content %}}

### Configure the OpenTelemetry Collector

The DataDog Helm chart provides a sample OpenTelemetry Collector configuration that's a great starting point for most projects. This section walks you through the predefined pipelines and included OpenTelemetry components.

This is the full OpenTelemetry Collector configuration in `otel-config.yaml`:

{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="otel-config.yaml" disable_copy="false" collapsible="true" >}}
receivers:
  prometheus:
    config:
      scrape_configs:
        - job_name: "otelcol"
          scrape_interval: 10s
          static_configs:
            - targets: ["0.0.0.0:8888"]
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:

>          endpoint: 0.0.0.0:{{ include "get-port-number-from-name" (dict "ports" .Values.datadog.otelCollector.ports "portName" "otel-grpc") }}

Reviewer 3: We shouldn't have helm template funcs outside of Helm. We should hard code the port

Author: Updated to hard code the values:

```
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
         endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
      http:
         endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4318
```

---
title: Install the Datadog Agent with Embedded OpenTelemetry Collector
private: true
further_reading:
- link: "/opentelemetry/agent/agent_with_custom_components"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Use Custom OpenTelemetry Components with Datadog Agent"
---

## Overview

> The Datadog Agent with embedded OpenTelemetry (OTel) Collector is an open source Collector distribution that includes:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Datadog Agent with embedded OpenTelemetry Collector is an open source Collector distribution that includes:
```

- Built-in Datadog pipelines and extensions
- Support for traces, metrics, and logs
- A curated set of components for optimal performance with Datadog

{{< img src="/opentelemetry/embedded_collector/architecture.png" alt="Architecture overview for Collector embedded in the Datadog Agent." style="width:100%;" >}}

Follow this guide to install the Datadog Agent with the OpenTelemetry Collector using Helm.

> <div class="alert alert-info">If your application is already instrumented with the OTel SDK or if you want to build a Datadog Agent image with additional OpenTelemetry components, read <a href="/opentelemetry/agent/agent_with_custom_components">Use Custom OpenTelemetry Components with Datadog Agent</a>.<br>For a list of components included by default, see <a href="#included-components">Included components</a>.</div>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-info">If your application is already instrumented with the OpenTelemetry SDK or if you want to build a Datadog Agent image with additional OpenTelemetry components, read <a href="/opentelemetry/agent/agent_with_custom_components">Use Custom OpenTelemetry Components with Datadog Agent</a>.<br>For a list of components included by default, see <a href="#included-components">Included components</a>.</div>
```

## Requirements

To complete this guide, you need the following:

**Datadog account**:
1. [Create a Datadog account][1] if you don't have one.
1. Find or create your [Datadog API key][2].
1. Find or create your [Datadog application key][3].

**Software**:
Install and set up the following on your machine:

- A Kubernetes cluster (v1.29+)
- Helm (v3+)
- [Docker][50]
- [kubectl][5]

> - Ensure all OTel components are compatible with the [embedded OpenTelemetry Collector version][51]

Reviewer 4: looks like this line is getting removed—but if it isn't, `s/OTel/OpenTelemetry`

1. To view available contexts, run:
   ```shell
   kubectl config get-contexts
   ```
1. Configure `kubectl` to interact with your cluster:
   ```shell
   kubectl config use-context <your-cluster-context>
   ```
   Replace <your-cluster-context> with the name of your Kubernetes cluster context.

## Install the Datadog Agent with OpenTelemetry Collector

### Add the Datadog Helm Repository

To add the Datadog repository to your Helm repositories:

```shell
helm repo add datadog https://helm.datadoghq.com
helm repo update
```

### Set up Datadog API and application keys

1. Get the Datadog [API][2] and [application keys][3].
1. Store the keys as a Kubernetes secret:
   ```shell
   kubectl create secret generic datadog-secret \
     --from-literal api-key=<DD_API_KEY> \
     --from-literal app-key=<DD_APP_KEY>
   ```
   Replace `<DD_API_KEY>` and `<DD_APP_KEY>` with your actual Datadog API and application keys.

### Configure the Datadog Agent

Use a YAML file to specify the Helm chart parameters for the [Datadog Agent chart][4].

1. Create an empty `datadog-values.yaml` file:
   ```shell
   touch datadog-values.yaml
   ```

>    <div class="alert alert-info">Unspecified parameters will use defaults from <a href="https://github.com/DataDog/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/datadog/values.yaml">values.yaml</a>.</div>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   <div class="alert alert-info">Unspecified parameters use defaults from <a href="https://github.com/DataDog/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/datadog/values.yaml">values.yaml</a>.</div>
```

> 1. Configure the Datadog API and Application key secrets:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Configure the Datadog API and application key secrets:
```

   {{< /code-block >}}
1. Switch the Datadog Agent Docker repository to use development builds:
   {{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-values.yaml" collapsible="true" >}}
agents:
  image:
    repository: datadog/agent-dev
    tag: nightly-ot-beta-main-jmx
    doNotCheckTag: true
...
   {{< /code-block >}}
   <div class="alert alert-info">This guide uses a Java application example. The <code>-jmx</code> suffix in the image tag enables JMX utilities. For non-Java applications, use <code>nightly-ot-beta-main</code> instead.<br> For more details, see <a href="/containers/guide/autodiscovery-with-jmx/?tab=helm">Autodiscovery and JMX integration guide</a>.</div>
1. Enable the OpenTelemetry Collector and configure the essential ports:
   {{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-values.yaml" collapsible="true" >}}
datadog:
  ...
  otelCollector:
    enabled: true
    ports:
      - containerPort: "4317" # default port for OpenTelemetry gRPC receiver.
        hostPort: "4317"
        name: otel-grpc
      - containerPort: "4318" # default port for OpenTelemetry HTTP receiver
        hostPort: "4318"
        name: otel-http
   {{< /code-block >}}

>    <div class="alert alert-info"><p>It is required to set the <code>hostPort</code> in order for the container port to be exposed to the external network. This enables configuring the OTLP exporter to point to the IP address of the node to which the Datadog Agent is assigned.</p><p>Alternatively, if you doesn't want to expose the port, you can use the agent service instead via <code>&lt;SERVICE_NAME&gt;.&lt;SERVICE_NAMESPACE&gt;.svc.cluster.local</code>.</p></div>

Reviewer 4: It's not clear to me exactly what to do if you want to use the agent service instead of exposing the port. I'm assuming there's an `<SERVICE_NAME>.<SERVICE_NAMESPACE>.svc.cluster.local` section of the helm chart—what value do you configure for it? is there an example we can point to?

Author: Good point! Updated to include instructions on how to change this.

1. (Optional) Enable additional Datadog features:

>    <div class="alert alert-danger">Enabling these features may incur additional charges. Review the <a href="https://www.datadoghq.com/pricing/"> pricing page</a> and talk to your CSM before proceeding.</div>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   <div class="alert alert-danger">Enabling these features may incur additional charges. Review the <a href="https://www.datadoghq.com/pricing/">pricing page</a> and talk to your CSM before proceeding.</div>
```

just removing stray (and ultimately inconsequential) space

datadog:
  ...
  podLabelsAsTags:
    app: kube_app
    release: helm_release
{{< /code-block >}}

{{% collapse-content title="Completed datadog-values.yaml file" level="p" %}}
Your `datadog-values.yaml` file should look something like this:
{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-values.yaml" collapsible="false" >}}
agents:
  image:
    repository: datadog/agent-dev
    tag: nightly-ot-beta-main-jmx
    doNotCheckTag: true

datadog:
  apiKeyExistingSecret: datadog-secret
  appKeyExistingSecret: datadog-secret

  otelCollector:
    enabled: true
    ports:
      - containerPort: "4317"
        hostPort: "4317"
        name: otel-grpc
      - containerPort: "4318"
        hostPort: "4318"
        name: otel-http
  apm:
    portEnabled: true
    peer_tags_aggregation: true
    compute_stats_by_span_kind: true
    peer_service_aggregation: true
  orchestratorExplorer:
    enabled: true
  processAgent:
    enabled: true
    processCollection: true

  podLabelsAsTags:
    app: kube_app
    release: helm_release
   {{< /code-block >}}

{{% /collapse-content %}}

### Configure the OpenTelemetry Collector

> The DataDog Helm chart provides a sample OpenTelemetry Collector configuration that's a great starting point for most projects. This section walks you through the predefined pipelines and included OpenTelemetry components.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Datadog Helm chart provides a sample OpenTelemetry Collector configuration that you can use as a starting point. This section walks you through the predefined pipelines and included OpenTelemetry components.
```

  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
         endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
      http:
         endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4318
exporters:
  debug:
    verbosity: detailed
  datadog:
    api:
      key: ${env:DD_API_KEY}
processors:
  infraattributes:
    cardinality: 2
  batch:
    timeout: 10s
connectors:
  datadog/connector:
    traces:
      compute_top_level_by_span_kind: true
      peer_tags_aggregation: true
      compute_stats_by_span_kind: true
service:
  pipelines:
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [infraattributes, batch]
      exporters: [datadog, datadog/connector]
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp, datadog/connector, prometheus]
      processors: [infraattributes, batch]
      exporters: [datadog]
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [infraattributes, batch]
      exporters: [datadog]

{{< /code-block >}}

#### Key components

To send telemetry data to Datadog, the following components are defined in the configuration:

{{% collapse-content title="Component diagram" level="p" %}}
{{< img src="/opentelemetry/embedded_collector/components.png" alt="Diagram depicting the Agent deployment pattern" style="width:100%;" >}}

> {{% /collapse-content %}}

Reviewer 4: It's not clear to me why this image is in a collapsible element (it doesn't seem to take up that much space)

##### Datadog connector

> The [Datadog connector][6] computes Datadog APM Trace Metrics.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The [Datadog connector][6] computes Datadog APM trace metrics.
```

{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="otel-config.yaml" disable_copy="false" collapsible="true" >}}
connectors:
  datadog/connector:
    traces:
      compute_top_level_by_span_kind: true
      peer_tags_aggregation: true
      compute_stats_by_span_kind: true
{{< /code-block >}}

##### Datadog exporter

The [Datadog exporter][7] exports traces, metrics, and logs to Datadog.

{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="otel-config.yaml" disable_copy="false" collapsible="true" >}}
exporters:
  datadog:
    api:
      key: ${env:DD_API_KEY}
{{< /code-block >}}

##### Prometheus receiver

> The [Prometheus receiver][8] collects health metrics from the OpenTelemetry Collector for the Metrics pipeline.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The [Prometheus receiver][8] collects health metrics from the OpenTelemetry Collector for the metrics pipeline.
```

{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="otel-config.yaml" disable_copy="false" collapsible="true" >}}
receivers:
  prometheus:
    config:
      scrape_configs:
        - job_name: "otelcol"
          scrape_interval: 10s
          static_configs:
            - targets: ["0.0.0.0:8888"]
{{< /code-block >}}

For more information, see the [Collector Health Metrics][8] documentation.

### Deploy the Agent with the OpenTelemetry Collector

To install or upgrade the Datadog Agent with OpenTelemetry Collector in your Kubernetes environment, use the following Helm command:

```shell
helm upgrade -i <RELEASE_NAME> datadog/datadog -f datadog-values.yaml
```

This Helm chart deploys the Datadog Agent with OpenTelemetry Collector as a DaemonSet. The Collector is deployed on the same host as your application, following the Agent deployment pattern. The Gateway deployment pattern is not supported.

{{% collapse-content title="Deployment diagram" level="p" %}}
{{< img src="/opentelemetry/embedded_collector/deployment.png" alt="Diagram depicting the Agent deployment pattern" style="width:100%;" >}}
{{% /collapse-content %}}

> ## Instrument and configure the application

Reviewer 4: Is this the correct title for this section? Should it be more like "Send your telemetry data to Datadog"?

> To send your telemetry data to Datadog, you need to do the following:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To send your telemetry data to Datadog:
```

> 1. Instrument your application.
> 2. Correlate your telemetry data.
> 3. Run your application.

Reviewer 4: These steps here don't match with the subsequent sections. Seems like it should be...
```suggestion
1. Instrument your application.
2. Configure the application
3. Correlate observability data.
4. Run your application.
```

And maybe add anchor links to each section?

### Instrument the application

Instrument your application [using the OpenTelemetry API][12].

As an example, you can use the [Calendar sample application][9] that's already instrumented for you.

1. Clone the `opentelemetry-examples` repository to your device:
   ```shell
   git clone https://github.com/DataDog/opentelemetry-examples.git
   ```
1. Navigate to the `/calendar` directory:
   ```shell
   cd opentelemetry-examples/apps/rest-services/java/calendar
   ```

> 1. The following code instruments [CalendarService.getDate()][10] method using the OpenTelemetry annotations and API:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. The following code instruments the [CalendarService.getDate()][10] method using the OpenTelemetry annotations and API:
```

1. Go to the Calendar application's Deployment manifest file:
   ```shell
   ./deploys/calendar/templates/deployment.yaml
   ```
1. The following environment variables configure the OTLP endpoint:
   {{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="deployment.yaml" disable_copy="true" collapsible="true" >}}
env:
  ...
  - name: OTEL_SERVICE_NAME
    value: {{ include "calendar.fullname" . }}
  - name: OTEL_K8S_NAMESPACE
    valueFrom:
      fieldRef:
        apiVersion: v1
        fieldPath: metadata.namespace
  - name: OTEL_K8S_NODE_NAME
    valueFrom:
      fieldRef:
        apiVersion: v1
        fieldPath: spec.nodeName
  - name: OTEL_K8S_POD_NAME
    valueFrom:
      fieldRef:
        apiVersion: v1
        fieldPath: metadata.name
  - name: OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL
    value: 'grpc'
  - name: OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES
    value: >-
      service.name=$(OTEL_SERVICE_NAME),
      k8s.namespace.name=$(OTEL_K8S_NAMESPACE),
      k8s.node.name=$(OTEL_K8S_NODE_NAME),
      k8s.pod.name=$(OTEL_K8S_POD_NAME),
      k8s.container.name={{ .Chart.Name }},
      host.name=$(OTEL_K8S_NODE_NAME),
      deployment.environment=$(OTEL_K8S_NAMESPACE)
   {{< /code-block >}}

> ## Run the application

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Run the application
```

As it's part of the list of steps, seems like this should be an h3

To start generating and forwarding observability data to Datadog, you need to deploy the Calendar application with the OpenTelemetry SDK using Helm.

1. Run the following `helm` command from the `calendar/` folder:
```shell
helm upgrade -i <CALENDAR_RELEASE_NAME> ./deploys/calendar/
```
1. This Helm chart deploys the sample Calendar application as a ReplicaSet.
1. To test that the Calendar application is running correctly, execute the following command from another terminal window:
   ```shell
   curl localhost:9090/calendar
   ```
1. Verify that you receive a response like:
   ```text
   {"date":"2024-12-30"}
   ```
Each call to the Calendar application results in metrics, traces, and logs being forwarded to the Datadog backend.

## Explore observability data in Datadog

> Use the Datadog UI to explore the observability data for the sample Calendar app.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Use Datadog to explore the observability data for the sample Calendar app.
```

        hostPort: "4318"
        name: otel-http
   {{< /code-block >}}

>    <div class="alert alert-info"><p>It is required to set the <code>hostPort</code> in order for the container port to be exposed to the external network. This enables configuring the OTLP exporter to point to the IP address of the node to which the <code>otel-agent</code> is assigned.</p><p>Alternatively, if you doesn't want to expose the port, you can use the agent service instead via <code>&lt;SERVICE_NAME&gt;.&lt;SERVICE_NAMESPACE&gt;.svc.cluster.local</code>.</p></div>

Reviewer 3: use Datadog Agent here `code>otel-agent</code> is assigned`
